Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
gastrointestinal physiology. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us turn to gastrointestinal physiology.
Outline the functions and organisation of the gastrointestinal tract.
The gastrointestinal tract is the system by which the body takes in,
breaks down and absorbs nutrients, and an understanding of its overall functions
and organisation is the foundation of the subject, so it is worth setting out.
The gastrointestinal tract is, in essence,
a long muscular tube running from the mouth to the anus,
with associated glandular organs — the salivary glands,
the pancreas and the liver — that secrete into it.
Its overall function is the processing of food: to take it in, move it along,
break it down into absorbable molecules,
absorb these along with water and electrolytes, and eliminate the residue.
These functions are carried out by a number of processes: motility,
the muscular movement that mixes and propels the contents; secretion,
the production of the enzymes, acid,
bile and other substances that digest the food; digestion,
the breakdown of the large food molecules into small absorbable ones;
and absorption, the uptake of the products, water and electrolytes into the blood.
The tract is regionally specialised:
the mouth and oesophagus for intake and transport;
the stomach for storage and the initial digestion; the small intestine,
the principal site of digestion and absorption;
and the large intestine for the absorption of water and the formation and storage
of the residue.
These functions are coordinated by an elaborate control system — nervous,
including the gut's own nervous system, and hormonal.
So the gastrointestinal tract is a muscular tube with associated glandular organs,
which processes food by motility, secretion, digestion and absorption — taking in,
propelling, breaking down and absorbing nutrients, water and electrolytes,
and eliminating the residue; regionally specialised from mouth to large intestine,
and coordinated by nervous and hormonal control — the system of nutrition,
of relevance to anaesthesia through its motility,
secretions and the risk of aspiration.
Describe the control of gastrointestinal function,
including the enteric nervous system and the gut hormones.
The functions of the gastrointestinal tract — its motility and secretion — are
coordinated by an elaborate control system, comprising its own nervous system,
the autonomic nerves and the gut hormones,
and an understanding of this is central to the subject, so it is worth describing.
The control is of two main kinds, nervous and hormonal.
The nervous control has two components.
First, the gut has its own intrinsic nervous system — the enteric nervous system —
a large network of neurons in the wall of the tract,
sometimes called the gut brain, which can control the motility and secretion
locally and autonomously, through its own reflexes,
independently of the central nervous system.
Second, this is modulated by the autonomic nervous system: the parasympathetic,
chiefly the vagus, generally stimulates gut activity — motility and secretion —
while the sympathetic generally inhibits it;
so the autonomic system adjusts the gut's activity to the body's overall state.
The hormonal control is by the gut hormones — hormones secreted by endocrine cells
scattered in the gut wall, released in response to food,
which regulate the secretion and motility; the principal ones include gastrin,
which stimulates gastric acid secretion; secretin and cholecystokinin,
released from the small intestine, which stimulate the pancreatic and biliary
secretions and modulate gastric activity; and others.
These systems coordinate the gut's response to a meal.
So gastrointestinal function is controlled by the enteric nervous system — the
gut's intrinsic network, controlling motility and secretion locally and
autonomously — modulated by the autonomic nerves,
the parasympathetic stimulating and the sympathetic inhibiting;
and by the gut hormones — gastrin, secretin,
cholecystokinin and others — released by food to regulate secretion and motility;
an elaborate control coordinating the gut's response to a meal.
Describe gastric secretion and its control.
The stomach secretes acid and other substances important in digestion,
and its secretion, particularly of acid, and the control of this,
are important — not least to anaesthesia,
through the acid in the stomach and the risk of aspiration — so they are worth
describing.
The stomach secretes the gastric juice, whose principal components are:
hydrochloric acid, secreted by the parietal cells,
which acidifies the stomach contents; pepsinogen, secreted by the chief cells,
which the acid converts to the enzyme pepsin, beginning the digestion of protein;
mucus, which protects the stomach lining from the acid; and intrinsic factor,
from the parietal cells, needed for the absorption of vitamin B-twelve.
The secretion of acid is closely controlled,
stimulated in response to a meal through three influences acting on the parietal
cell: the hormone gastrin, released from the stomach in response to food;
the parasympathetic vagal stimulation; and histamine, released locally,
which strongly stimulates acid secretion — the basis of the action of the
histamine-receptor-blocking drugs.
The secretion is classically described in phases: an anticipatory cephalic phase,
mediated by the vagus, before food arrives; a gastric phase,
when food in the stomach stimulates secretion; and an intestinal phase.
The acid secretion is inhibited as the meal is processed and the stomach empties.
This acid secretion is relevant to anaesthesia,
as the volume and acidity of the gastric contents determine the risk and severity
of acid aspiration, and the drugs that reduce it are used in prophylaxis.
So the stomach secretes gastric juice — acid from the parietal cells,
pepsinogen from the chief cells, protective mucus, and intrinsic factor;
the acid secretion controlled, in response to a meal, by gastrin,
vagal stimulation and histamine, in cephalic, gastric and intestinal phases;
relevant to anaesthesia through the acid gastric contents and aspiration risk,
and the drugs that reduce it — an important secretion of the gut.
Describe the pancreatic and biliary secretions and their role in digestion.
The pancreas and the biliary system secrete into the small intestine substances
essential for digestion — the pancreatic enzymes and juice,
and the bile — and an understanding of these is important,
so they are worth describing.
Two great secretions enter the small intestine, at the duodenum,
to act on the food leaving the stomach.
The exocrine pancreas secretes the pancreatic juice, which has two parts: a watery,
alkaline, bicarbonate-rich fluid, which neutralises the acid coming from the
stomach, providing the alkaline environment the intestinal enzymes need;
and the pancreatic enzymes, a powerful set that digest all three classes of
foodstuff — enzymes for carbohydrate, for fat, and for protein,
the protein-digesting enzymes secreted as inactive precursors and activated in the
gut, to protect the pancreas.
The liver secretes bile, which is stored and concentrated in the gallbladder and
released into the intestine; the bile contains the bile salts,
which are essential for the digestion and absorption of fat — they emulsify the
fat, breaking it into fine droplets that the fat-digesting enzymes can act on,
and they form the structures that carry the products of fat digestion to be
absorbed; the bile also carries the excretory products, such as bilirubin.
The secretion of both is stimulated,
in response to the food entering the intestine,
by the gut hormones secretin and cholecystokinin, and by the vagus.
So the pancreas secretes the pancreatic juice — an alkaline,
bicarbonate-rich fluid neutralising the gastric acid,
and the enzymes digesting carbohydrate,
fat and protein — and the liver secretes bile, stored in the gallbladder,
whose bile salts are essential for the digestion and absorption of fat by
emulsifying it and carrying its products; both stimulated by secretin,
cholecystokinin and the vagus when food enters the intestine — secretions essential
for digestion in the small intestine.
Describe the digestion and absorption of the principal nutrients.
The central function of the gastrointestinal tract is to digest the food into
absorbable molecules and to absorb them,
and an understanding of how the three classes of nutrient are digested and absorbed
is the core of the subject, so it is worth describing.
The food consists of three main classes — carbohydrate,
protein and fat — which are large molecules that must be broken down into small
absorbable units, chiefly in the small intestine,
which is specialised for this with its huge surface area.
Carbohydrate, eaten chiefly as starch and sugars,
is digested by enzymes — from the saliva and the pancreas,
and at the intestinal surface — into the simple sugars, chiefly glucose,
which are absorbed, by specific transporters, into the blood.
Protein is digested, by the pepsin of the stomach and the enzymes of the pancreas
and intestinal surface, into amino acids and small peptides,
which are absorbed by specific transporters.
Fat is the most complex: being insoluble in water,
it must first be emulsified by the bile salts,
then digested by the pancreatic enzymes into fatty acids and other products;
these are carried, in the structures formed by the bile salts,
to the intestinal surface, absorbed,
and then handled in a special way — reassembled in the cells and carried away
largely in the lymph.
Water and electrolytes, and the vitamins and minerals, are also absorbed.
So digestion and absorption occur chiefly in the small intestine:
carbohydrate digested to simple sugars, chiefly glucose,
and absorbed by transporters; protein digested to amino acids and peptides,
absorbed by transporters; and fat emulsified by bile salts,
digested to fatty acids, carried to the surface, absorbed and reassembled,
entering the lymph; with water, electrolytes,
vitamins and minerals also absorbed — the core nutritional function of the gut.
Describe gastrointestinal motility, including gastric emptying.
The movement of the gut — its motility — mixes the contents with the secretions and
propels them along, and its patterns, particularly gastric emptying, are important,
the latter being of direct anaesthetic relevance, so they are worth describing.
The motility is produced by the smooth muscle of the gut wall,
controlled by the enteric nervous system, the autonomic nerves and the hormones;
it serves to mix the contents with the digestive secretions and to propel them
along the tract at a rate allowing digestion and absorption.
The characteristic propulsive movement is peristalsis — a wave of contraction that
moves the contents onward — and there are mixing movements.
The regions differ: the oesophagus rapidly propels swallowed food to the stomach;
the stomach stores the meal, mixes it, and then empties it, in a controlled manner,
into the small intestine; the small intestine mixes and slowly propels the
contents; and the large intestine moves the residue slowly,
allowing water absorption, with periodic mass movements.
Gastric emptying is of particular anaesthetic importance.
The stomach empties its contents into the duodenum at a controlled rate,
regulated so as not to overwhelm the intestine — slowed by fat and acid in the
duodenum, through nervous and hormonal feedback.
The rate of gastric emptying is important to anaesthesia because a full stomach is
the source of the aspiration risk; and emptying is delayed by many factors relevant
to the surgical patient — pain, trauma, opioids,
and others — so that a patient may have a full stomach despite fasting.
So gastrointestinal motility, produced by the gut smooth muscle under nervous and
hormonal control, mixes and propels the contents by peristalsis,
with the regions specialised — the stomach storing, mixing and emptying the meal;
gastric emptying being controlled, slowed by fat and acid, and,
importantly for anaesthesia, delayed by pain, trauma and opioids,
so determining the aspiration risk — a function of direct anaesthetic relevance.
Describe the physiology relevant to gastric emptying,
aspiration risk and its prevention.
The risk of the regurgitation and aspiration of gastric contents is one of the
major hazards of anaesthesia, and it rests directly on the physiology of the
stomach — its contents, its emptying,
and the barrier at its inlet — so drawing this physiology together is of great
practical importance.
The hazard is that, under anaesthesia, the protective airway reflexes are lost,
so that if gastric contents pass up the oesophagus into the pharynx,
they may be aspirated into the lungs, causing the damage of aspiration,
the more severe the more acid and the larger the volume.
Several physiological factors determine the risk.
First, the volume and nature of the gastric contents: a full stomach,
or acidic contents, increase the risk — hence the fasting before anaesthesia,
to allow the stomach to empty, and the use of drugs to reduce the volume and
acidity.
Second, gastric emptying: as discussed,
emptying is delayed by many factors in the surgical patient — pain, trauma,
opioids, pregnancy, and gastrointestinal disease — so that the stomach may not be
empty despite fasting; this is why such patients are treated as having a full
stomach.
Third, the barrier at the inlet of the stomach: normally,
the lower oesophageal sphincter and the anatomical arrangement prevent reflux;
this barrier may be impaired — by pregnancy, by a hiatus hernia,
and by some drugs and conditions — increasing the risk.
The prevention rests on this physiology: fasting;
reducing the volume and acidity with drugs; and, where the risk is high,
protecting the airway rapidly with a rapid sequence induction and cricoid pressure.
So the aspiration risk rests on the gastric physiology:
the volume and acidity of the contents, reduced by fasting and drugs;
gastric emptying, delayed by pain, opioids,
trauma and pregnancy so the stomach may be full despite fasting;
and the competence of the lower oesophageal barrier,
impaired by pregnancy and hiatus hernia; the prevention — fasting, drugs,
and rapid airway protection — following directly from this physiology — a matter of
major anaesthetic importance.
Pull it together: how does the gastrointestinal system carry out the nutrition of
the body, and why does it matter to anaesthesia?
I would draw the gastrointestinal system together around its role as the system of
nutrition — taking in, breaking down and absorbing food — carried out by the
coordinated processes of motility, secretion, digestion and absorption,
with several points of direct anaesthetic relevance.
The tract, a muscular tube with its glandular organs,
processes the food through specialised regions.
The food is taken in and propelled, by the motility,
through the stomach — which stores it, begins its digestion with acid and pepsin,
and empties it in a controlled way — into the small intestine,
the principal site of digestion and absorption.
There, the pancreatic juice neutralises the acid and provides the enzymes,
and the bile emulsifies the fat; the three classes of nutrient are digested into
their absorbable units — sugars, amino acids and fatty acids — and absorbed,
with the water and electrolytes; the residue passes to the large intestine,
where water is absorbed and the residue formed.
All this is coordinated by the enteric nervous system,
the autonomic nerves and the gut hormones.
The relevance to anaesthesia is considerable: above all,
the risk of regurgitation and aspiration of gastric contents,
resting on the gastric volume, the emptying — delayed by pain,
opioids and trauma — and the oesophageal barrier;
the handling of fluid and electrolytes, lost in gastrointestinal disease;
and the effects of the gut on drug absorption.
So the gastrointestinal system carries out the nutrition of the body by the
coordinated motility, secretion, digestion and absorption along its specialised
regions — the stomach storing and beginning digestion,
the small intestine the main site of digestion and absorption,
aided by the pancreatic and biliary secretions; coordinated by the enteric,
autonomic and hormonal controls; mattering to anaesthesia chiefly through the
aspiration risk, resting on gastric emptying and the oesophageal barrier,
and through fluid, electrolyte and drug handling — the system of nutrition,
of practical anaesthetic importance.
Describe the enteric nervous system in more detail.
The enteric nervous system is a remarkable feature of the gut,
large and capable of autonomous function,
and a fuller account of it is worth giving,
as it is central to the control of gut function.
The enteric nervous system is the intrinsic nervous system of the gastrointestinal
tract — a very large collection of neurons,
comparable in number to those of the spinal cord,
arranged in networks within the wall of the tract along its length,
sometimes called the gut's own brain.
It is organised into two main networks, or plexuses: one,
between the muscle layers, chiefly controlling the motility; and another,
in the deeper layers, chiefly controlling the secretion and blood flow.
The system contains all the elements of a nervous system: sensory neurons,
which detect the state of the gut — the stretch of its wall,
the chemical content of its lumen; interneurons; and motor neurons,
which control the smooth muscle, the glands and the blood vessels.
With these, it can carry out integrated reflexes entirely within the gut wall,
controlling the motility and secretion locally and autonomously,
without the central nervous system — for instance,
organising the peristaltic reflex that propels the contents.
It is, however, modulated by the autonomic nervous system,
which adjusts its activity to the body's overall needs.
So it functions as a semi-autonomous control system,
handling the moment-to-moment control of the gut,
under the overall influence of the autonomic nerves.
So the enteric nervous system is the gut's large intrinsic nervous system,
arranged in two plexuses — one controlling motility,
the other secretion and blood flow — containing sensory neurons,
interneurons and motor neurons, with which it carries out integrated reflexes,
such as peristalsis, controlling the gut locally and autonomously without the
central nervous system; modulated by the autonomic nerves — a semi-autonomous
control system central to gut function.
Describe the gut hormones and their actions.
The gut is a major endocrine organ,
secreting a range of hormones that coordinate digestion,
and an understanding of the principal gut hormones and their actions is worth
having, as they integrate the gut's response to a meal.
The gut hormones are secreted by endocrine cells scattered through the lining of
the gastrointestinal tract, released in response to the food and its products,
and acting to coordinate the secretion and motility of the various parts of the
tract — so that the gut acts in an integrated way as the meal passes through.
The principal hormones are several. Gastrin,
secreted by the stomach in response to food,
stimulates the secretion of gastric acid, preparing the stomach for digestion.
Secretin, secreted by the small intestine in response to the acid arriving from the
stomach, stimulates the pancreas and liver to secrete the alkaline,
bicarbonate-rich fluid that neutralises the acid — so it acts to protect the
intestine from the acid.
Cholecystokinin, secreted by the small intestine in response to the fat and protein
arriving, stimulates the pancreas to secrete its enzymes and the gallbladder to
contract and release bile — so it brings the digestive secretions to bear on the
food; it also slows gastric emptying,
regulating the delivery of food to the intestine.
Other gut hormones, including the incretins discussed with the pancreas,
signal to other organs. So these hormones coordinate the digestive process.
So the gut is a major endocrine organ,
its scattered endocrine cells secreting hormones in response to food that
coordinate digestion: gastrin from the stomach stimulating acid secretion;
secretin from the intestine stimulating the alkaline pancreatic and biliary fluid
to neutralise the acid; cholecystokinin stimulating the pancreatic enzymes and
gallbladder contraction and slowing gastric emptying;
with other hormones such as the incretins — integrating the gut's response to a
meal.
Describe the protective mechanisms of the gastric mucosa and the consequences of
their failure.
The stomach secretes a powerful acid yet does not normally digest itself,
owing to protective mechanisms of the mucosa, and an understanding of these,
and of the consequences of their failure, is worth having.
The stomach faces the problem of secreting hydrochloric acid strong enough to begin
digestion and to kill many ingested organisms,
while protecting its own lining from this acid and from the digestive enzyme pepsin.
It does so by the mucosal barrier — a set of protective mechanisms.
The surface cells secrete a layer of mucus, which coats the lining;
and they secrete bicarbonate into this mucus layer,
neutralising the acid at the surface; so a protective,
alkaline mucus layer separates the lining from the acid lumen.
The lining cells are tightly joined, resisting penetration;
and they are rapidly renewed. A good mucosal blood flow supports these defences,
supplying the cells and removing any acid that penetrates.
These defences are promoted by protective factors, including the prostaglandins.
When the balance between the aggressive factors — the acid and pepsin — and the
protective factors is disturbed, the mucosa can be damaged,
leading to inflammation and ulceration — peptic ulcer disease.
This occurs when the defences are impaired — notably by certain drugs,
the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
which inhibit the protective prostaglandins,
and by infection with a particular bacterium — or when the acid is excessive.
The treatment accordingly reduces the acid, with the antisecretory drugs,
and addresses the cause.
So the gastric mucosa is protected from its own acid and pepsin by the mucosal
barrier — a surface layer of mucus with bicarbonate neutralising the acid,
tightly-joined and rapidly-renewed cells, and a good blood flow,
promoted by prostaglandins; the failure of these defences — from non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs inhibiting the prostaglandins, from infection,
or from excessive acid — causing inflammation and peptic ulceration,
treated by reducing the acid and addressing the cause — protective mechanisms whose
failure causes ulcer disease.
Describe the functions of the large intestine.
The large intestine completes the processing of the gut contents,
chiefly by absorbing water and forming and storing the residue,
and an understanding of its functions is worth having to complete the account of
the tract.
The large intestine receives, from the small intestine,
the residue of the food after the digestion and absorption of the nutrients — a
fluid material — and its principal task is to convert this into the formed faeces
for elimination, chiefly by absorbing water.
Its functions are several.
First, the absorption of water and electrolytes:
the large intestine absorbs most of the water from the fluid material it receives,
together with electrolytes, so that the residue is progressively dehydrated and
solidified into formed faeces — this is its major role,
and the recovery of this water is important to the body's water balance.
Second, it is the site of a large population of bacteria — the gut flora — which
ferment some of the residue, produce certain vitamins, and have other functions.
Third, it stores the faeces until they are eliminated by defaecation,
a process with both reflex and voluntary control.
The large intestine moves its contents slowly,
allowing time for the water absorption, with periodic stronger movements.
The importance of the water absorption is shown by diarrhoea,
in which the failure to absorb the water, or excessive secretion,
causes the loss of large volumes of fluid and electrolytes,
which can lead to dehydration and electrolyte disturbance — of relevance to fluid
management.
So the large intestine completes the processing of the gut contents:
chiefly by absorbing water and electrolytes,
dehydrating the residue into formed faeces and recovering water for the body;
housing the gut bacteria, which ferment the residue and produce vitamins;
and storing the faeces until defaecation; its importance shown by diarrhoea,
where the loss of this water and electrolytes causes dehydration — completing the
account of the tract.
Describe the absorption and handling of fat in more detail.
The absorption of fat is more complex than that of the other nutrients,
because fat is insoluble in water, and an understanding of how this is overcome is
worth having, as it illustrates the role of the bile and has clinical relevance.
Fat presents a special problem to the gut: being insoluble in the watery contents,
it cannot simply be dissolved and absorbed like the sugars and amino acids,
and several specialised steps are needed.
First, the fat, arriving in the intestine as large globules,
must be emulsified — broken into fine droplets — to give the digestive enzymes
access to it; this is done by the bile salts from the bile,
which coat and disperse the fat.
Second, the emulsified fat is digested by the pancreatic fat-digesting enzyme into
its products — fatty acids and related molecules.
Third, these products, still poorly water-soluble,
are carried to the intestinal surface in tiny aggregates formed by the bile salts —
which act as vehicles ferrying the products through the watery layer to the lining
cells, where they are absorbed.
Fourth, within the lining cells, the absorbed products are reassembled into fat and
packaged into particles, which, being large,
do not enter the blood directly but are carried away in the lymph,
eventually reaching the bloodstream.
So the absorption of fat depends critically on the bile salts.
This explains why a lack of bile — as in obstruction of the bile ducts — impairs
fat absorption, causing fat to be lost in the stool and impairing the absorption of
the fat-soluble vitamins.
So fat absorption is complex because fat is water-insoluble:
it is emulsified into fine droplets by the bile salts,
digested by the pancreatic enzyme into fatty acids,
carried to the surface in bile-salt aggregates, absorbed,
reassembled within the cells, and carried away in the lymph;
depending critically on the bile salts,
so that a lack of bile impairs fat absorption,
causing fat loss in the stool and impaired absorption of the fat-soluble vitamins —
illustrating the role of bile.
Describe the gastrointestinal handling of water and electrolytes and its relevance
to fluid balance.
The gastrointestinal tract handles large volumes of fluid and electrolytes each
day, and its disturbance is an important cause of fluid and electrolyte disorders
relevant to anaesthesia, so this is worth describing.
The gut handles a surprisingly large volume of fluid daily.
To it comes not only the fluid that is drunk,
but the large volumes of the digestive secretions — the saliva, the gastric juice,
the pancreatic and biliary secretions,
and the intestinal secretions — which together amount to several litres a day.
Almost all of this fluid is then reabsorbed — the great majority in the small
intestine, and most of the remainder in the large intestine — so that only a small
amount is lost in the faeces; the gut thus secretes and reabsorbs a large volume,
with a small net loss.
This handling is relevant to fluid balance because its disturbance causes the loss
of large volumes of fluid and electrolytes.
Vomiting loses the gastric secretions, with their acid — causing the loss of fluid,
hydrogen and chloride, and a metabolic alkalosis.
Loss from lower in the tract, as in diarrhoea or from a fistula or drainage,
loses fluid with different electrolyte and bicarbonate content — causing
dehydration and, often, a metabolic acidosis and potassium loss.
Obstruction of the gut causes fluid to be sequestered in the gut, a hidden loss.
These losses are important in the surgical patient,
requiring the replacement of the fluid and electrolytes, matched to what is lost.
So the gut handles a large daily volume of fluid — the drunk fluid and several
litres of digestive secretions — almost all reabsorbed, with a small faecal loss;
its disturbance causing important fluid and electrolyte losses — vomiting losing
acid and causing alkalosis, diarrhoea and fistulae causing dehydration,
acidosis and potassium loss, and obstruction sequestering fluid — losses important
in the surgical patient and requiring matched replacement — of direct relevance to
fluid balance.
Describe the swallowing mechanism and oesophageal function.
Swallowing and the transport of food down the oesophagus are the first steps of the
gut's handling of food, with features relevant to the airway and to reflux,
so they are worth describing.
Swallowing is the process by which food is moved from the mouth to the stomach,
and it has a carefully coordinated sequence, partly voluntary and partly reflex.
It begins voluntarily, with the tongue pushing the bolus of food to the back of the
mouth; this triggers the swallowing reflex, an involuntary,
coordinated sequence controlled by a centre in the brainstem.
In this reflex, the bolus is propelled through the pharynx,
and — crucially — the airway is protected: breathing is briefly halted,
and the larynx is closed and elevated,
so that the food passes over the closed airway into the oesophagus rather than into
the trachea; this protection is important,
and its failure — in disease or impaired consciousness — leads to the aspiration of
food.
The food then enters the oesophagus,
which transports it to the stomach by a wave of peristalsis,
the muscular contraction propelling it down; at the lower end,
the lower oesophageal sphincter relaxes to admit the food to the stomach and then
closes.
This lower oesophageal sphincter is important as the barrier against the reflux of
gastric contents back into the oesophagus; its competence, as discussed,
is relevant to the risk of regurgitation and aspiration.
So swallowing moves food from mouth to stomach in a coordinated sequence:
a voluntary start, then the involuntary swallowing reflex,
controlled by the brainstem, which propels the bolus through the pharynx while
protecting the airway by halting breathing and closing the larynx — its failure
causing aspiration; the food then propelled down the oesophagus by peristalsis,
the lower oesophageal sphincter admitting it and then closing as the barrier
against reflux — features relevant to the airway and to regurgitation.
Describe the splanchnic circulation and its behaviour in shock and anaesthesia.
The gastrointestinal tract has a large blood supply — the splanchnic circulation —
with features relevant to its function and to the response to shock and
anaesthesia, so it is worth describing.
The splanchnic circulation is the blood supply to the gastrointestinal tract and
the associated organs — a large circulation,
receiving a substantial fraction of the cardiac output,
and notable for two features.
First, it serves the gut's functions — supplying the metabolically active mucosa
and carrying away the absorbed nutrients, the venous blood from the gut draining,
through the portal vein, to the liver,
to be processed before returning to the general circulation.
The blood flow increases after a meal, to support digestion and absorption.
Second, the splanchnic circulation is a large reservoir of blood and a region of
adjustable vascular resistance, which the body uses in the regulation of the
circulation: in conditions of stress or threat to the circulation,
the sympathetic nervous system constricts the splanchnic vessels,
diverting blood away from the gut to the vital organs — the heart and brain — and
mobilising the pooled blood.
This is important in shock: in haemorrhage or shock,
the splanchnic circulation is constricted to help maintain the central circulation,
but at the cost of reducing the blood flow to the gut,
which can damage the gut mucosa if severe or prolonged.
Anaesthesia and surgery also affect the splanchnic flow,
through their haemodynamic effects and surgical manipulation.
So the splanchnic circulation is the large blood supply to the gut,
serving its functions — supplying the mucosa and carrying nutrients via the portal
vein to the liver, with flow increasing after a meal — and serving as a blood
reservoir and adjustable resistance used in circulatory regulation:
constricted by the sympathetic system in stress and shock to divert blood to the
vital organs, at the cost of gut perfusion,
which can damage the mucosa — a circulation relevant to gut function and to the
response to shock and anaesthesia.
The vomiting reflex is of obvious anaesthetic interest.
Describe its physiological control.
Vomiting is a protective brainstem reflex coordinated by a functional vomiting
centre in the lateral medullary reticular formation,
which integrates inputs and drives the motor sequence of emesis.
It receives afferents from four principal sources.
First, the chemoreceptor trigger zone in the area postrema on the floor of the
fourth ventricle, which lies outside the blood–brain barrier and senses circulating
emetogens — it is rich in dopamine D-two, serotonin 5-HT-three,
and neurokinin NK-one receptors, the very targets of our antiemetics.
Second, the vagal and sympathetic afferents from the gastrointestinal tract,
activated by distension, irritation or 5-HT-three release from enterochromaffin
cells, important after abdominal surgery and chemotherapy.
Third, the vestibular system, acting through histamine H-one and muscarinic
receptors, responsible for motion sickness.
Fourth, higher cortical centres, mediating vomiting from sights, smells,
pain or anticipation.
The efferent motor act involves a deep inspiration, closure of the glottis,
descent of the diaphragm, contraction of the abdominal muscles raising
intra-abdominal pressure, and relaxation of the lower and upper oesophageal
sphincters, with reverse peristalsis expelling gastric contents.
Understanding these pathways explains why effective prophylaxis is multimodal,
combining drugs that act at different receptors.
So the reflex is a convergent brainstem network,
and we block it most reliably at several points at once.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The GI tract (a muscular tube + glandular organs: salivary glands, pancreas,
liver) processes food by motility, secretion,
digestion and absorption — regionally specialised:
mouth/oesophagus (intake/transport), stomach (storage + initial digestion),
small intestine (main digestion/absorption),
large intestine (water absorption + residue).
Second, Control: the enteric nervous system (the gut's intrinsic 'brain' — local
autonomous reflexes) modulated by autonomic nerves (parasympathetic/vagus
stimulates, sympathetic inhibits) and by gut hormones (gastrin → acid;
secretin + cholecystokinin → pancreatic/biliary secretion).
3. Gastric secretion: parietal cells → HCl + intrinsic factor;
chief cells → pepsinogen (→ pepsin); mucus protects.
Acid secretion is driven by gastrin,
vagal stimulation and histamine (basis of H2-blockers),
in cephalic/gastric/intestinal phases.
Pancreatic juice neutralises gastric acid (bicarbonate) and digests all three
nutrient classes; bile salts emulsify fat for digestion/absorption.
Third, Digestion/absorption (chiefly small intestine):
carbohydrate → simple sugars (glucose) via transporters;
protein → amino acids/peptides via transporters; fat → emulsified by bile salts,
digested to fatty acids, carried to the surface, absorbed and reassembled,
entering the lymph; plus water, electrolytes, vitamins, minerals.
Fourth, Aspiration risk (a major anaesthetic hazard) rests on gastric physiology:
volume/acidity of contents (reduced by fasting + drugs);
gastric emptying (delayed by pain, opioids, trauma,
pregnancy — so the stomach may be full despite fasting);
and the lower oesophageal barrier (impaired by pregnancy, hiatus hernia).
Prevention = fasting, antacid/antisecretory drugs,
and rapid airway protection (RSI + cricoid pressure) where risk is high.
Thank you. That concludes the station.